[USING] Add Joinmarket Explanation (#474)
zkSNACKs/WasabiDoc: docs/using-wasabi/Joinmarket.md

---
{
  "title": "Joinmarket",
  "description": "Details about the Joinmarket mixing technique and implementation. This is the Wasabi documentation, an archive of knowledge about the open-source, non-custodial and privacy-focused Bitcoin wallet for desktop."
}
---

# Joinmarket

[[toc]]

## Introduction and History

> [Joinmarket](https://github.com/JoinMarket-Org/joinmarket-clientserver) is a CoinJoin protocol implemented in a wallet software which requires Bitcoin Core as backend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Joinmarket](https://github.com/JoinMarket-Org/joinmarket-clientserver) is a CoinJoin protocol implemented in a wallet software which requires Bitcoin Core as the back end.
```
Webster's dictionary & Wikipedia consistently separate backend into back end, and I think correct grammar is to place the article:the in front of back end. Apparently hyphenating (back-end) is an acceptable option also.

> Its novel innovation is to introduced incentive structures to encourage users to mix their coins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Its novel innovation is to introduce incentive structures to encourage users to mix their coins.
```

> One market taker can pay many market makers to create a tailor made CoinJoin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One market taker can pay many market makers to create a tailor-made CoinJoin.
```

The software consists of several python scripts, has a graphical user interface, and utilizes IRC communication channels.
The initial v0.1.0 release was in December 2015 by [Chris Belcher](https://github.com/chris-belcher), and since then it has gathered steady support by several contributors, most notably [Adam Gibson](https://github.com/AdamISZ).

> Joinmarket is an integral part of the Bitcoin privacy infrastructure, and the research and implementation by the contributors is invaluable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Joinmarket is an integral part of the Bitcoin privacy infrastructure, the research and implementation by the contributors are invaluable.
```

Reviewer 2: Superseded by https://github.com/zkSNACKs/WasabiDoc/pull/474#discussion_r365557771

> Joinmarket is an integral part of the Bitcoin privacy infrastructure, and the research and implementation by the contributors is invaluable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Joinmarket is an integral part of the Bitcoin privacy infrastructure. 
The research and implementation by the contributors are invaluable.
```
Fixes a "run-on" sentence.

> Joinmarket is well [documentation](https://github.com/JoinMarket-Org/joinmarket-clientserver/tree/master/docs) in regards for [installation](https://github.com/JoinMarket-Org/joinmarket-clientserver/blob/master/docs/INSTALL.md), usage of the [command line interface](https://github.com/JoinMarket-Org/joinmarket-clientserver/blob/master/docs/USAGE.md) and [graphical user interface](https://github.com/JoinMarket-Org/joinmarket-clientserver/blob/master/docs/JOINMARKET-QT-GUIDE.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Joinmarket is well [documented](https://github.com/JoinMarket-Org/joinmarket-clientserver/tree/master/docs) in regards to [installation](https://github.com/JoinMarket-Org/joinmarket-clientserver/blob/master/docs/INSTALL.md), usage of the [command line interface](https://github.com/JoinMarket-Org/joinmarket-clientserver/blob/master/docs/USAGE.md) and [graphical user interface](https://github.com/JoinMarket-Org/joinmarket-clientserver/blob/master/docs/JOINMARKET-QT-GUIDE.md).
```

## Market Makers

Joinmarket makers are users running the [yield generator script](https://github.com/JoinMarket-Org/joinmarket-clientserver/blob/master/docs/YIELDGENERATOR.md) and offering their coins as potential inputs in a CoinJoin transaction.

> These users advertise the total volume of bitcoin they would like to mix [for example a range from 0.1 to 5 bitcoin], as well as the fee they charge for their provided service [for example at least 2000 sats, or 0.02% of the CoinJoin denomination] to a public IRC channel.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These users advertise the total volume of bitcoin they would like to mix [for example a range from 0.1 to 5 bitcoins], as well as the fee they charge for their provided service [for example at least 2000 sats, or 0.02% of the CoinJoin denomination] to a public IRC channel.
```

> The requirement is an always on, stable and relatively high bandwidth internet connection, so to successfully coordinate many mixes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The requirement is an always on, stable and relatively high bandwidth internet connection, so as to successfully coordinate many mixes.
```

:::tip Reclaim your privacy & stack sats!
Joinmarket makers get paid to do tailor-made CoinJoins with the taker.
:::

## Market Takers

> Joinmarket takers are users who coordinate a tailor made CoinJoin, and they pay the makers to provide the liquidity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Joinmarket takers are users who coordinate a tailor-made CoinJoin, and they pay the makers to provide the liquidity.
```

> Takers analyze the range and fees of offered coins of makers, specify a transaction where the makers coins are part of the input, and the output creates equal value coins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Takers analyze the range and fees of coins offered by makers, specify a transaction where the makers coins are part of the input, and the output creates equal value coins.
```
This reads a bit better, IMHO. Chaining "ofs" can be hard to follow. (At least for me :) )

> The number of makers and the value of the outputs is completely up to the taker, it is a tailor made CoinJoin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The number of makers and the value of the outputs is completely up to the taker, it is a tailor-made CoinJoin.
```

> Although makers can not anonymity the input to output link of other makers, the taker knows exactly which maker gets which output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although makers can not connect the input to output link of other makers, the taker knows exactly which maker gets which output.
```
Not sure if "connect" is optimal, but anonymity doesn't work here.

> Although makers can not connect the input to output link of other makers, the taker knows exactly which maker gets which output.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Although makers cannot link the input to the output of other makers, the taker knows exactly which maker gets which output.
```

:::tip Create CoinJoins just how you like them!
Joinmarket takers pay for coordinating tailor-made mixes.
:::

## Joinmarket + Wasabi

The advantage of Joinmarket is that the taker can coordinate tailor-made mixes, and that the maker gets paid to join.
The problem with Joinmarket is that the taker can spy on the makers.

> The advantage of Wasabi is that the coordinator cannot spy, and that mixes achieve high anonset. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The advantage of Wasabi is that the coordinator cannot spy, and that Wasabi mixes achieve high anonset. 
```

> The advantage of Wasabi is that the coordinator cannot spy, and that Wasabi mixes achieve high anonset. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The advantage of Wasabi is that the coordinator cannot spy, and that Wasabi mixes achieve high anonset.
```

The problem with Wasabi is that there are standardized equal value output amounts.

:::tip A perfect match!

> The problems with Wasabi are the strenght of Joinmarket, and the downsides of Joinmarket are the features of Wasabi!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The problems with Wasabi are the strength of Joinmarket, and the downsides of Joinmarket are the features of Wasabi!
```

> The problems with Wasabi are the strength of Joinmarket, and the downsides of Joinmarket are the features of Wasabi!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The problems with Wasabi are the strengths of Joinmarket, and the downsides of Joinmarket are the features of Wasabi!
```

:::

> These two tools can be combined in great effect, thus it is on the long term road-map to implement Joinmarket functionality in Wasabi wallet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These two tools can be combined in great effect, thus it is on the long term road-map to implement Joinmarket functionality in Wasabi Wallet.
```

> These two tools can be combined in great effect, thus it is on the long term road-map to implement Joinmarket functionality in Wasabi wallet, for example such a protocol:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These two tools can be combined in great effect, thus it is on the long term road-map to implement Joinmarket functionality in Wasabi wallet. For example, such a protocol:
```

Author: ```suggestion
These two tools can be combined in great effect, thus it is on the long term road-map to implement Joinmarket functionality in Wasabi wallet.
For example such a protocol:
```

I added the new line.

> 1. With your non-private coins, make at least two rounds of Wasabi zero link CoinJoins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. With your non-private coins, make at least two rounds of Wasabi ZeroLink CoinJoins.
```

This means that your pre-mix coins are not tied to the following Joinmarket mixers.

2. With these anonset coins, run the yield generator as a Joinmarket maker for as long as possible, partaking in many mixes with many different takers.

> In this step you gain privacy that you were part of the initial Wasabi mix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this step you gain privacy, in that you were part of the initial Wasabi mix.
```

Further, the mixing fees you earn might be enough to pay at least for the transaction and coordination fees of the whole process.

> 3. With these Joinmarket coins, make at least two rounds of Wasabi zero link CoinJoins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. With these Joinmarket coins, make at least two rounds of Wasabi ZeroLink CoinJoins.
```

This will break the Joinmarket history of these coins, thus nobody knows you were a maker.

> 4. With these high anonset coins, coordinate a tailor made CoinJoin as a Joinmarket taker, where you can specify exactly the value you want to actually send.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. With these high anonset coins, coordinate a tailor-made CoinJoin as a Joinmarket taker, where you can specify exactly the value you want to actually send.
```

The problem with Joinmarket is that the taker can spy on the makers.
The advantage of Wasabi is that the coordinator cannot spy, and that Wasabi mixes achieve high anonset.
The problem with Wasabi is that there are standardized equal value output amounts.

:::tip A perfect match!
The problems with Wasabi are the strengths of Joinmarket, and the downsides of Joinmarket are the features of Wasabi!
:::

These two tools can be combined in great effect, thus it is on the long term road-map to implement Joinmarket functionality in Wasabi Wallet.
For example such a protocol:

1. With your non-private coins, make at least two rounds of Wasabi ZeroLink CoinJoins.
This means that your pre-mix coins are not tied to the following Joinmarket mixers.

2. With these anonset coins, run the yield generator as a Joinmarket maker for as long as possible, partaking in many mixes with many different takers.
In this step you gain privacy, in that you were part of the initial Wasabi mix.
Further, the mixing fees you earn might be enough to pay at least for the transaction and coordination fees of the whole process.

> 

Reviewer 3: This whole idea seems based on a faulty premise. These downsides of joinmarket only apply if the user is running a maker but most users who actually want privacy use taker mode. Taker mode means no other peer can spy on them, hence there's no point using Wasabi at all in this situation if they've already used joinmarket.

And actually, the coordinator in Wasabi *can* spy in a targeted manner on a specific coin if they do a sybil attack.

Author: Thanks Chris, your of course right that the taker is very private, as he's the coordinator.
What I wanted to point out here is that one round of zero link provides higher anonset as one round of a taker. And intuitively I would say that encapsulating the maker mixes with zero link [or many taker mixes] is a good idea, as here the maker history is hidden from pre-mix sender and post-mix receiver. Further, this is layering on defenses, so IF only Joinmarket, or only Wasabi, are broken, then the other is still providing privacy. 

Anyhow, this is only one of potentially many interesting strategies one can make when combining Joinmarket with ZeroLink, maybe this chapter is a nice place to elaborate on these.

The potential sybil attack of the coordinator is another good point, though I think this deserves its own chapter, not in this one on Joinmarket.

Reviewer 3: It is worthwhile changing the part about JoinMarket makers and takers, because right now the text implies that the only way to use JoinMarket is to be a maker, which is not correct.

Reviewer 4: @chris-belcher I don't really understand what you mean with that last comment. The very first line of the text you're reviewing says "The advantage of Joinmarket is that the taker can coordinate tailor-made mixes ..." so how is it implying that the only way to use Joinmarket is as a maker?

Otoh I do agree on reflection that the line "The problem with Joinmarket is that the taker can spy on the makers." is just kinda wrong .. a maker chooses to offer coins for liquidity knowing that any taker that chooses them knows the linkage .. they're not worse off than before, so "the taker spies on the makers" is the wrong way to look at it - sorta.

This point generally is pretty tricky: people often come into Joinmarket and think maker side is obviously the smart way to use it, and it's not **entirely** wrong to see it that way - for some use cases, it can make sense, but there should be no illusion of full privacy in doing that.

Author: Please see 5acc940, I tried to explain the trade-offs more accurately, also that many rounds of making brings privacy against any one taker.

Joinmarket is an integral part of the Bitcoin privacy infrastructure.
The research and implementation by the contributors are invaluable.

Joinmarket is well [documented](https://github.com/JoinMarket-Org/joinmarket-clientserver/tree/master/docs) in regards to [installation](https://github.com/JoinMarket-Org/joinmarket-clientserver/blob/master/docs/INSTALL.md), usage of the [command line interface](https://github.com/JoinMarket-Org/joinmarket-clientserver/blob/master/docs/USAGE.md) and [graphical user interface](https://github.com/JoinMarket-Org/joinmarket-clientserver/blob/master/docs/JOINMARKET-QT-GUIDE.md).

## Market Makers

Joinmarket makers are users running the [yield generator script](https://github.com/JoinMarket-Org/joinmarket-clientserver/blob/master/docs/YIELDGENERATOR.md) and offering their coins as potential inputs in a CoinJoin transaction.
These users advertise the total volume of bitcoin they would like to mix [for example a range from 0.1 to 5 bitcoins], as well as the fee they charge for their provided service [for example at least 2000 sats, or 0.02% of the CoinJoin denomination] to a public IRC channel.

> A maker chooses to offer coins for liquidity knowing that the taker can deanonymze the maker in this one transaction, thus it is adviced to do several rounds of making with different takers to gain privacy even against any one taker. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A maker chooses to offer coins for liquidity knowing that the taker can deanonymze the maker in this one transaction, thus it is advised to do several rounds of making with different takers to gain privacy even against any one taker. 
```
